Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. If
I could ask you to take your seats or if
you're not staying for this next
fantastic session on an honest
conversation about AI and humanity,
please may I kindly request that you
leave the room quietly. I am delighted
to introduce this afternoon one of the
world's leading authors, historians, and
philosophers, Yuval Noah Harrari. He is
a distinguished research fellow at the
University of Cambridge at the center
for the study of existential risk. He
has been a lecturer in the department of
history at the Hebrew University of
Jerusalem and he is co-founder of
Sapenship.
As many of you will know, he is a
best-selling author of, amongst many
books, Sapiens, a brief history of
humankind, Homodus, Brief History of
Tomorrow, and 21 Lessons for the 21st
century, amongst others, selling over 50
million books worldwide in 65 languages.
He focuses on the macrohistorical
questions of our time. And what a
perfect moment with this pressing
arrival and disruption of AI to have
somebody of Yaval's distinction take on
this challenge. Please join me in warmly
welcoming Yuval Noah Harrari to deliver
a conversation about AI and humanity.
So hello everyone.
There is one question that every leader
today must answer about AI. But to
understand that question, we first need
to clarify a few points about what AI is
and what AI can do.
The most important thing to know about
AI is that it is not just another tool.
It is an agent. It can learn and change
by itself and make decisions by itself.
A knife is a tool. You can use a knife
to cut salad or to murder someone, but
it is your decision what to do with the
knife.
AI is a knife that can decide by itself
whether to cut salad or to commit
murder.
The second thing to know about AI is
that it can be a very creative agent.
AI is a knife that can invent new kinds
of knives as well as new kinds of music,
medicine, and money.
The third thing to know about AI is that
it can lie and manipulate.
4 billion years of evolution have
demonstrated that anything that wants to
survive learns to lie and manipulate.
The last four years have demonstrated
that AI agents can acquire the will to
survive and that AIs have already
learned how to lie.
Now, one big open question about AI
is whether it can think.
Modern philosophy began in the 17th
century when Rene Deart proclaimed I
think therefore I am.
Even before the cult we humans defined
ourselves by our capacity to think. We
believe our we rule the world because we
can think better than anyone else on
this planet.
Will AI challenge our supremacy in the
field of thinking? Now that depends on
what thinking means.
Try to observe yourself thinking. What
is happening there?
Many people observe words popping in
their mind and forming sentences and the
sentences then forming arguments like
all humans are mortal. I am human
therefore I am mortal.
If thinking really means putting words
and other language tokens in order, then
AI can already think much better than
many many humans. AI can certainly come
up with a sentence like AI thinks,
therefore AI.
Some people argue that AI is just
glorified autocomplete. It barely
predicts the next word in a sent in a
sentence.
But is that so different from what the
human mind is doing?
Try to observe to catch the next word
that pops up in your mind. Do you really
know why you thought that word where it
came from? Why do you did you think this
particular word and not some other word?
Do you know? As far as putting words in
order is concerned,
AI already thinks better than many of
us. Therefore, anything made of words
will be taken over by AI. If laws are
made of words, then AI will take over
the legal system. If books are just
combinations of words, then AI will take
over books. If religion is built from
words, then AI will take over religion.
This is particularly true of religions
based on books like Islam, Christianity
or Judaism.
Judaism called itself the religion of
the book and it grants ultimate
authority not to humans but to words in
books. Humans have authority in Judaism
not because of our experiences but only
because we learn words in books. Now no
human can read and remember all the
words in all the Jewish books. But AI
can easily do that.
What happens to a religion of the book
when the greatest expert on the holy
book is an AI?
However, some some people may say, can
we really reduce human spirituality
to just words in books? Does thinking
mean only putting language tokens in
order?
If you observe yourself carefully when
you're thinking, you will notice that
something else is happening there
besides words popping in your mind and
forming sentences.
You also have some nonverbal feelings.
Maybe you feel pain. Maybe you feel
fear. Maybe love.
Some thoughts are painful. Some are
frightening. Some are full of love.
While AIs become better than us with
words,
at least for now, we have zero evidence
that AIs can feel anything. Of course,
because AI is mastering language,
AI can pretend to feel pain or love. AI
can say, "I love you." And if you
challenge it to describe how love feels,
AI can provide the best verbal
description in the world.
AI can read countless love poems and
psychology books and can then describe
the feeling of love much better than any
human poet, psychologist or lover. But
these are just words.
The Bible says in the beginning was the
word and the word was made flesh.
The taqing says the truth that can be
expressed in words is not the absolute
truth. Throughout history, people have
always struggled with the tension
between word and flesh, between the
truth that can be expressed in words and
the absolute truth which is beyond
words.
Previously this tension was internal to
humanity. It was between different human
groups. Some humans gave supreme
importance to words. They've been
willing, for example, to abandon or even
kill their gay son just because of a few
words in the Bible.
Other humans have said, "But these are
just words. The spirit of love should be
much more important than the letter of
the law."
This tension between spirit and letter
existed in every religion, every legal
system, even every person.
Now this tension will be externalized.
It will become the tension not between
different humans. It this will be the
tension
between humans and AIs, the new masters
of words. Everything made of words will
be taken over by AI.
Previously all the words, all our verbal
thoughts, they originated in some human
mind. Either my mind I thought this or I
learned it from another human. Soon most
of the words in our minds will originate
in a machine. I just heard today about a
new word that AIS coined by themselves
to describe us humans.
They called us the watchers.
The watchers that we are watching them.
AIS will soon be the origin of maybe
most of the words in our minds.
AIS will mass prodduce thoughts by
assembling words, symbols, images, and
other language tokens into new
combinations.
Whether humans will still have a place
in that world depends on the place we
assign our nonverbal feelings and our
ability to embody wisdom that cannot be
expressed in words. If we continue to
define ourselves by our ability to think
in words, our identity will collapse.
All this means that no matter from which
country you come, your country will soon
face a severe identity crisis and also
an immigration crisis.
The immigrants this time will not be
human beings coming in fragile boats
without a visa or trying to cross a
border in the middle of the night. The
immigrants will be millions of AIs that
can ride love poles better than us, that
can lie better than us, and that can
travel at the speed of light without any
need of visas.
Like human immigrants, these AI
immigrants will bring various benefits
with them. We will have AI doctors to
help in our health care systems, AI
teachers to help in our education
systems, even AI border guards to stop
illegal human immigrants. But the AI
immigrants will also bring with them
problems.
Those who are concerned about human
immigrants usually argue that immigrants
might take jobs, might change the local
culture, might be politically disloyal.
I'm not sure that's true of all human
immigrants, but it will definitely be
true of the AI immigrants.
The AI immigrants will take many human
jobs. The AI immigrants will completely
change the culture of every country.
They will change out religion and even
romance. Some people don't like it if
their son or daughter is dating an
immigrant boyfriend. What would these
people think when their son or daughter
starts dating an AI boyfriend?
And of course, the AI immigrants will
have some dubious political loyalties.
They are likely to be loyal not to your
country but but to some corporation
government across the ocean most
probably in one of only two countries
China or the USA.
The USA encourages countries to close
their borders to human immigrants but
open them very very wide to USA
immigrants.
And now we can finally come to the
question each one of you must soon
answer.
Will your country recognize the AI
immigrants as legal persons?
AIS are obviously not persons. They
don't have a body or a mind. But a legal
person is something quite different from
a person.
A legal person is an entity that the law
recognizes as having certain legal
obligations and rights. For example, the
right to hold property, to file a
lawsuit, and to enjoy freedom of speech.
In many countries, corporations are
considered legal persons. The Alphabet
Corporation can open a bank account, can
sue you in court, or can donate to your
next presidential campaign.
In New Zealand, rivers have been
recognized as legal persons. In India,
certain gods have been granted such
recognition. Of course, until today,
recognizing a corporation, a river, or a
god as a legal person was just legal
fiction.
In practice, if a corporation like
Alphabet decided to buy another
corporation or if a Hindu god, [cough]
if a Hindu god decided to sue you in
court, the decision wasn't really made
by the god. It was made by some human
executives, shareholders or trustees.
It is different with AIS. Unlike rivers
and gods, AIs can actually make
decisions by themselves.
They will soon be able to make the
decisions necessary to manage a bank
account, to file a lawsuit, and even to
operate a corporation without any need
of human executives, shareholders or
trustees.
AIS can therefore function as persons.
Do we want to allow that? Will your
country recognize AIS as legal persons?
What if other countries do it?
Suppose your country doesn't want to
recognize AIS as persons. But the USA in
the name of deregulating AI and
deregulating the markets grants legal
recognition, legal personhood to
millions of AIs which start running
millions of new corporations.
Will you block these USAI corporations
from operating in your country?
Suppose some USI persons invent super
efficient and super complex financial
devices that humans cannot fully
understand and therefore don't know how
to regulate. Will you open your
financial markets to this new AI
financial wizardry or will you try to
block it thereby decoupling from the
American financial system?
Suppose some AI persons create a new
religion which gains the faith of
millions of people. That should not
sound too far-fetched because after all,
almost all previous religions in history
have claimed that they were created by a
nonhuman intelligence. Now, will your
country extend freedom of religion to
the new AI sect and to its AI priests
and missionaries?
Maybe we should start with something a
bit simpler. Will your country allow AI
persons to open social media accounts,
enjoy freedom of speech on Facebook, on
Tik Tok and befriendly children?
Well, of course, that question should
have been asked 10 years ago. On social
media, AI bots have been operating as
functional persons for at least a
decade. If you think AIS should not be
treated as persons on social media, you
should have acted 10 years ago.
10 years from now, it will be too late
for you to decide whether AIs should
function as persons in the financial
markets, in the courts, in the churches.
Somebody else will already have decided
it for you.
If you want to influence where humanity
is going, you need to make a decision
now.
So what is your answer as a leader? Do
you think the AI immigrants should be
recognized as legal persons? If not, how
are you going to stop that?
Thank you for listening to this human.
Thank you, Yaval. That was fantastic
overview. You posed a lot of questions
um and they're the right ones. I agree
with much of what you say. We're here in
Davos where the theme is around dialogue
and I was struck by your commentary
around words and the importance of words
and that being something that demarcates
human animals from other animals
although that's debatable that there's
other language there. So in the context
of Davos and the range of people we have
here from technology from the business
world from politicians
>> how would you like to see what is the
answer that you have in terms of this
slightly dystopian world you've
potentially put in front of us
>> and if I may just add to that I think
it's fair to say I'm a scientist by
background a neuroscientist so I uh work
a lot in this space particularly around
pain and we're very comfortable with the
fact that many of our discoveries
particularly technological discoveries
we often drive them forward and then
afterwards we think oh we hadn't thought
enough about the ethics and the
implications and then we're trying to
catch up on the regulation that we need
to maybe put around it
>> so we are where we are this thing is
happening as everybody says at scale
both in terms of its magnitude and its
pace more than we've ever seen before in
the industrial revolution we have all
the right blend of people here in Davos,
it's all about dialogue. What would you
like to see go forward in terms of
putting boundaries around some of the
slightly more worrying areas that you
detailed? And what are your own thoughts
about the ethical implications of giving
legal rights to either agents to robots
or to the ones that just exist on the
internet?
>> A lot of things there. I mean, first of
all, I I would say that no, Davos is
about words.
It's about talking. The basic idea of
Davos is that you can change the world
just by talking. Which I like this idea
because this is also my idea as an
author, as a university lecturer. This
is what I do. I talk, I write. I think I
can influence the world the world with
words.
Um, and this is now in in question. Are
we at the end of the road for words?
um is this no longer a function?
And
you know engineers and also soldiers
they don't change the world with words
they do stuff they take action.
Um philosophers,
scholars also political leaders
they try to change the world with words
by saying things. And maybe we've
reached the end of that road. And what
does it mean that we know we we humans
we conquer the world ultimately I would
say with language and words because yes
engineers can make weapons and soldiers
can wield them. But to build an army you
need to convince thousands of strangers
to cooperate. How do you do that? With
words, with ideology, with religion.
So, humans took over the world not
because we are the strongest physically,
but because we discovered how to use
words to get thousands and millions and
billions of strangers to cooperate.
This was our superpower. And now
something has emerged that is going to
take our superpower from us. Until a few
years ago, nothing on earth could use
words. Only humans, chimpanzees
couldn't, rivers couldn't, the sun
couldn't, we could use words.
Now there is something that is able or
soon will be able to use words better
than us. And you look just, you know, at
what happened on social media and the
immense change it brought to the world
there.
So 10 years from now, living in a world
in which AIs are in command of language,
how does that look like?
>> Well, Davos in 10 years might look very
different as you say. So that's a future
we can all try to think about in the
context of who would be here beyond the
physical human. But if I may just um
discuss a little bit around the fact
that it's not new for humans to be uh
beaten by technology. So if we think
about some of the tech, we can't fly and
we built airplanes. Cars can go faster
than us. We're very comfortable with
that. The threat that comes with AI is
the fact that it's a threat to the
sovereign power of our ability to think.
And that is destabilizing. I say that as
an academic and an educator. That's
something that is very threatening. But
if we go back to say a robot, the value
we would place on a robot being able to
run the 100 meters faster than Usain
Bolt is less. There's something about
the human endeavor, the struggle, the
suffering, the fact that we can have a
collective sense of empathy and
understanding about what it meant to
achieve something, even if it was
lesser, with technology. I just wonder
whether an author that would replace
you, how much as a human we would value
that the words of that the creativity
that comes from art that's been done
with artificial intelligence
>> if do you think we will value it as much
and therefore there's still a place for
humans in the creative space of thinking
and words
>> that's the identity crisis because the
cow didn't say I run therefore I am
>> I think I mean it based human identity
on our capacity to think. We always knew
that cheetahs can run faster than us. We
always knew that elephants are much
bigger and stronger than us. So we
didn't define ourselves by this. We
define ourselves by thinking. And now
something is going to be better than us
in thinking if thinking means putting
words in order. Now I'm again I'm an
author. I'm a speaker. I put words in
order. This is like this is my game.
Like I have all these words and I put oh
let's put these words in this in this
order. No no no no no no. It will be
better to put it like this like this
like this and AI will beat me. I don't
know how long it will take two years 5
years 10 years it will beat me and then
what does it mean for our identity?
People identify you know with the
streams of of words in in in their mind
like you close your eyes you try to see
what's happening inside me. Many people,
I'm one of them, we see words popping
up, organizing themselves. We identify
with that.
>> But I guess my point is using the same
analogy is that we still value a human.
We have the Olympics. We've got the
Winter Olympics coming.
>> We know that many other animals and
other technologies can outperform in
many of those areas. Yet, we still
really enjoy the humanity of people that
train and develop even though it's not
as good. And I just wonder whether we
will just naturally extend that to the
thinking realm and to the word so that
you still will have a very very vibrant
and successful author role in 10 years
time and
>> I don't know like
>> because I will value your book more than
an AI generated book
>> even if even if the AI comes up with new
ideas better than me like let's say that
you want to invest money and you have a
you ask a human consultant and she comes
up with a certain whatever and you can
empathize with her because she had this
life story and whatever and then you
have the AI financial consultant with
zero life story, zero emotions but
better financial advice.
Which one will you follow?
>> Now we always have this kind of I think
the bigger mistake and this is why I
started with the idea of agency. We
always think that uh um we can just use
these things as tools.
>> But if they can think
>> they are agents.
>> Yeah. You know, maybe I I'll tell a
story from medieval history that how did
the Anglo-Saxons
took over Britain and it's part myth
about history that you know the Britain
who lived there originally they were
fighting with the PS and the Scots
coming from the north and the Britain
didn't fight very well. So the king of
the Britain, Vodiger, he said, "I have
an idea. I've heard that in Germany, in
Scandinavia, these people really know
how to fight. So let's bring over some
mercenary, some Anglo-Saxon mercenary.
They will fight for us. They will defeat
the picss and the Scots." And Vodig
brings over Anglo-Saxon mercenaries and
they fight well and they defeat the
Scots and the picss. But then the
Anglo-Saxons says say to themselves this
is a rich country and these people they
are very weak and these people they are
disunited we can take over
>> and they take over. We understand this
with human mercenaries.
>> We understand that when you bring a
human mercenary okay you pay them but
they have a mind of their own maybe they
rebel.
>> We don't get it with AIS.
>> Yeah. You know, you look at the leader
of of the world, they think, "Oh, I'll
bring AI to fight my war for me."
The idea that it can just take power
away from me.
>> Yeah.
>> It doesn't really cross their mind. They
don't really accept that AIS can think.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And that is very
fundamentally different. So, just to
reverse that, you're an alum of my
institution. Uh, and and we're proud of
that. Um, although you're working at the
other place now in Cambridge. Um so the
challenge I think for the education
sector and it goes back to a reverse
flip of what Alan Turing said which was
whether a computer could think the sort
of birthplace of of artificial
intelligence if you will. So I think the
question we've been posing inside the
academic sector is how do we keep humans
thinking because if we keep abdicating
our decision making our financial
decisions or whatever it might be
increasingly increasingly to AI the
worry we have quite quickly and we're
seeing this with students coming to us
through the school system very overusing
chat GPT is the deskilling of critical
faculties of human brain thinking. So
what's your advice to me in the academic
sector about how can we hang in there as
humans and keep humans thinking so that
we at least have some capacity to live
alongside these technologies which as
you say bring us into a very different
place going forward in terms of world
order.
>> You know at the present moment we still
think better.
>> So at the present moment it's kind of
telling people you you need your
critical thinking, you need moral
evaluations. You cannot get that from
AI. But we need to prepare to the moment
when this is no longer the case. We need
to prepare for the moment. Let's say
again take economics or finance when AI
create a new financial systems a new
financial system that they understand
and we don't understand. How do you
train economists or politicians in a
world in which humans really can't can
no longer understand how finance
functions because AIs have created this
super complex financial system that we
are like the horses you know that horses
can see that they are being traded from
one human to another for a few shiny
gold coins they can't understand this
idea of money too complicated
We can be in the same situation 10 years
from now. Davos 10 years from now.
>> Maybe nobody in the room, no human in
the room understands the financial
system anymore because it's dominated by
AIs and the AIs have come up with new
financial strategies and devices
that are just mathematically beyond the
human capacity of of the brain. So how
does politics and finance and davos look
like in a world when no human beings
understands finance anymore?
>> Yeah. No. Well, that's a beautiful note
to finish on. We've run out of time.
There are many more questions that we
could explore. One of which just being
the major difference uh that we know
about artificial intelligence compared
to human intelligence is of course the
human brain develops from birth to
adulthood around age 20. And it is a
product of your life experience as a
sentient human being feeling loving
anger these emotions. And whilst one can
improvise a little bit with sensory
detectors and you can train the brain to
do that that is fundamentally different.
So the artificial brain is not a human
brain. It is not human. And there is
maybe something that is still of value
there that goes back to that core
business of this sentient human being
that brings value to our understanding.
And maybe one last comment.
>> Please
>> think about educating kids in a world
where from day zero maybe the most of
the interaction of the new child is with
an AI. Yeah.
>> And not with a human being.
>> Yeah.
>> It's the biggest and scariest
psychological experiment in history and
we are conducting it.
>> Indeed, we are. Well, you thank you so
much. I'm delighted that you're thinking
about these problems and that you've got
us all thinking this afternoon. I look
forward to you coming back maybe to
Davos in in uh 10 years and reflecting
on this conversation and just where we
have got to. But thank you all to the
audience, those of you online and those
in the group. And thank you. Can we give
a round of applause?